Part 5 of The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.
Henry Jekyll's Full Statement of the Case
I was born to a large fortune, endowed besides with excellent parts, inclined by nature to
industry, fond of the respect of the wise and good among my fellow men, and thus as
might have been supposed, with every guarantee of an honorable and distinguished future.
And indeed the worst of my faults was a certain impatient gaiety of disposition, such as has
made the happiness of many, but such as I found it hard to reconcile with my imperious
desire to carry my head high and wear a more than commonly grave countenance before the
public.
Hence it came about that I concealed my pleasures, and that when I reached years of reflection,
and began to look round me and take stock of my progress and position in the world,
I stood already committed to a profound duplicity of me.
Many a man would have even blazoned such irregularities as I was guilty of, but from the high views
that I had set before me, I regarded and hid them with an almost morbid sense of shame.
It was thus rather the exacting nature of my aspirations, than any particular degradation
in my faults, that made me what I was, and with an even deeper trench than in the majority
of men, severed in me those provinces of good and ill which divide and compound man's dual
nature.
In this case, I was driven to reflect deeply and inveterate on that hard law of life which
lies at the root of religion, and is one of the most plentiful springs of distress.
Though so profound a double-dealer, I was in no sense a hypocrite.
Both sides of me were in dead earnest.
I was no more myself when I laid aside restraint and plunged in shame, than when I laboured
in the eye of the day at the furtherance of knowledge or the relief of sorrow and suffering.
And it chanced that the direction of my scientific studies, which led wholly towards the mystic
and the transcendental, reacted and shed a strong light on this consciousness of the
war among my members.
With every day, and from both sides of my intelligence, the moral and the intellectual,
I thus drew steadily nearer to that truth by whose partial discovery I have been doomed
to such a dreadful shipwreck, that man is not truly one, but truly two.
I say two, because the state of my own knowledge does not pass beyond that point.
Others will follow, others will outstrip me on the same lines, and I hazard the guess
that man will be ultimately known for a mere polity of multifarious, incongruous, and independent
denizens.
I, for my part, from the nature of my life, advanced infallibly in one direction, and
in one direction only.
It was on the moral side, and in my own person, that I learned to recognize the thorough and
primitive duality of man.
I saw that, of the two natures that contended in the field of my consciousness, even if
I could rightly be said to be either, it was only because I was radically both, and
from an early date, even before the course of my scientific discoveries had begun to
suggest the most naked possibility of such a miracle, I had learned to dwell with pleasure,
as a beloved daydream, on the thought of the separation of these elements.
If each, I told myself, could be housed in separate identities, life would be relieved
of all that was unbearable, the unjust might go his way, delivered from the aspirations
and remorse of his more upright twin, and the just could walk steadfastly and securely
on his upward path, doing the good things in which he found his pleasure, and no longer
exposed to disgrace and penitence by the hands of this extraneous evil.
It was the course of mankind that these incongruous faggots were thus bound together, that in
the agonized womb of consciousness these polar twins should be continuously struggling.
How then were they disassociated?
I was so far in my reflections, when, as I have said, a side-light began to shine upon
the subject from the laboratory table.
I began to perceive more deeply than it has ever yet been stated the trembling immateriality,
the mist-like transience, of this seemingly so solid body in which we walk attired.
Certain agents I found to have the power to shake and pluck back that fleshly vestment,
even as a wind might toss the curtains of a pavilion.
For two good reasons I will not enter deeply into this scientific branch of my confession.
First, because I have been made to learn that the doom and burden of our life is bound forever
on man's shoulders, and when the attempt is made to cast it off, it but returns upon us
with more unfamiliar and more awful pressure.
Second, because as my narrative will make, alas, too evident, my discoveries were incomplete.
Enough then that I not only recognized my natural body from the mere aura and effulgence
of certain of the powers that made up my spirit, but managed to compound a drug by which these
powers should be dethroned from their supremacy, and a second form and countenance substituted,
none the less natural to me, because they were the expression and bore the stamp of
lower elements in my soul.
I hesitated long before I put this theory to the test of practice.
I knew well that I risked death, for any drug that so potently controlled and shook the
very fortress of identity might by the least scruple of an overdose, or at the least inopportunity
in the moment of exhibition, utterly blot out that immaterial tabernacle which I looked
to it to change.
But the temptation of a discovery so singular and profound at last overcame the suggestions
of alarm.
I had long since prepared my tincture.
I purchased at once, from a firm of wholesale chemists, a large quantity of a particular
salt which I knew from my experiments to be the last ingredient required, and late one
accursed night I compounded the elements, watched them boil and smoke together in the
glass, and when the ebullition had subsided, with a strong glow of courage, drank off the
potion.
The most racking pangs succeeded.
A grinding in the bones, deadly nausea, and a horror of the spirit that cannot be exceeded
at the hour of birth or death.
Then these agonies began swiftly to subside, and I came to myself as if out of a great
sickness.
There was something strange in my sensations, something indescribably new, and from its
varied novelty incredibly sweet.
I felt younger, lighter, happier in body.
Within I was conscious of a heady recklessness, a current of disordered sensual images running
like a mill-race in my fancy, a solution of the bonds of obligation, an unknown but not
an innocent freedom of the soul.
I knew myself, at the first breath of this new life, to be more wicked, tenfold more
wicked, sold a slave to my original evil, and the thought in that moment braced and
delighted me like wine.
I stretched out my hands, exulting in the freshness of these sensations, and in the
act I was suddenly aware that I had lost in stature.
There was no mirror at that date in my room.
That which stands beside me as I write was brought there later on, and for the very purpose
of these transformations.
The night, however, was far gone into the morning.
The morning, black as it was, was nearly ripe for the conception of the day.
The inmates of my house were locked in the most rigorous hours of slumber, and I determined,
flush as I was with hope and triumph, to venture in my new shape as far as to my bedroom.
I crossed the yard, wherein the constellations looked down upon me, I could have thought
with wonder, the first creature of that sort that their unsleeping vigilance had yet disclosed
to them.
I stole through the corridors, a stranger in my own house, and coming to my room, I
saw for the first time the appearance of Edward Hyde.
I must here speak by theory alone, saying not that which I know, but that which I suppose
to be most probable.
The evil side of my nature, to which I had now transferred the stamping efficacy, was
less robust and less developed than the good which I had just deposed.
Again, in the course of my life, which had been, after all, nine-tenths a life of effort,
virtue and control, it had been much less exercise and much less exhausted, and hence,
as I think, it came about that Edward Hyde was so much smaller, slighter, and younger
than Henry Jekyll.
Even as good shone upon the countenance of the one, evil was written broadly and plainly
on the face of the other.
Evil besides, which I must still believe to be the lethal side of man, had left on that
body an imprint of deformity and decay.
And yet, when I looked upon that ugly idol in the glass, I was conscious of no repugnance,
rather of a leap of welcome.
This too was myself.
It seemed natural and human.
In my eyes it bore a livelier image of the spirit.
It seemed more express and single than the imperfect and divided countenance I had been
hitherto accustomed to call mine.
And in so far as I was doubtless right, I have observed that when I wore the semblance
of Edward Hyde, none could come near to me at first without a visible misgiving of the
flesh.
This, I take it, was because all human beings, as we meet them, are co-mingled out of good
and evil, and Edward Hyde, alone in the ranks of mankind, was pure evil.
I lingered but a moment at the mirror.
The second and conclusive experiment had yet to be attempted.
It yet remained to be seen if I had lost my identity beyond redemption, and must flee
before daylight from a house that was no longer mine.
And hurrying back to my cabinet, I once more prepared and drank the cup, once more suffered
the pangs of disillusion, and came to myself once more with the character, the stature,
and the face of Henry Jackall.
That night I had come to the fatal crossroads.
Had I approached my discovery in a more noble spirit, had I risked the experiment while
under the empire of generous or pious aspirations, all must have been otherwise, and from these
agonies of death and birth I had come forth an angel instead of a fiend.
The drug had no discriminating action.
It was neither diabolical nor divine.
It but shook the doors of the prison-house of my disposition.
And like the captives of Philippi, that which stood within ran forth.
At that time my virtue slumbered.
My evil, kept awake by ambition, was alert and swift to seize the occasion, and the thing
that was projected was Edward Hyde.
Hence, although I had now two characters as well as two appearances, one was wholly evil,
and the other was still the old Henry Jackall, that incongruous compound of whose reformation
and improvement I had already learned to despair.
The movement was thus wholly toward the worse.
Even at that time I had not conquered my aversions to the dryness of a life of study.
I would still be merrily disposed at times, and as my pleasures were, to say the least,
dignified, and I was not only well-known and highly considered, but growing towards the
elderly man, this incoherency of my life was daily growing more unwelcome.
It was on this side that my new power tempted me, until I fell in slavery.
I had but to drink the cup to doff at once the body of the noted professor, and to assume,
like a thick cloak, that of Edward Hyde.
I smiled at the notion.
It seemed to me at the time to be humorous, and I made my preparations with the most studious
care.
I took and furnished that house in Soho to which Hyde was tracked by the police, and
engaged as a housekeeper a creature whom I knew well to be silent and unscrupulous.
On the other side I announced to my servants that a Mr. Hyde, whom I described, was to
have full liberty and power about my house in the square, and to parry mishaps I even
called and made myself a familiar object in my second character.
I next drew up that will to which you so much objected, so that if anything befell me in
the person of Dr. Jekyll, I could enter on that of Edward Hyde without pecuniary loss,
and thus fortified, as I supposed, on every side, I began to profit by the strange immunities
of my position.
Men have before hired bravos to transact their crimes, while their own person in reputation
sat under shelter.
I was the first that ever did so for his pleasures.
I was the first that could plod in the public eye with a load of genial respectability,
and in a moment, like a schoolboy, strip off these lendings and spring headlong into the
sea of liberty.
But for me, in my impenetrable mantle, the safety was complete.
Think of it, I did not even exist.
Let me but escape into my laboratory door, give me but a second or two to mix and swallow
the draught that I had always standing ready, and whatever he had done, Edward Hyde would
away like the stain of breath upon a mirror, and there in his stead, quietly at home, trimming
the midnight lamp in his study, a man who could afford to laugh at suspicion would be
Henry Jekyll.
The pleasures which I made haste to seek in my disguise were, as I have said, undignified.
I would scarce use a harder term, but in the hands of Edward Hyde they soon began to turn
toward the monstrous.
When I would come back from these excursions, I was often plunged into a kind of wonder
at my vicarious depravity.
This familiar that I called out of my own soul, and sent forth alone to do his good
pleasure, was a being inherently malign and villainous.
His every act and thought centred on self, drinking pleasure with bestial avidity from
any degree of torture to another, relentless like a man of stone.
Henry Jekyll stood at times aghast before the acts of Edward Hyde, but the situation
was apart from ordinary laws, and insidiously relaxed the grasp of conscience.
It was Hyde, after all, and Hyde alone that was guilty.
Jekyll was no worse.
He woke again to his good qualities, seemingly unimpaired, and he would even make haste where
it was possible to undo the evil done by Hyde.
And thus his conscience slumbered.
Into the details of the infamy at which I was thus connived, for even now I can scarce
grant that I committed it, I have no design of entering.
I mean to point out the warnings and the successive steps with which my chastisement approached.
I met with one accident, which, as it brought on no consequence, I shall no more than mention.
An act of cruelty to a child aroused against me the anger of a passer-by, whom I recognized
the other day in the person of your kinsman.
The doctor and the child's family joined him.
There were moments when I feared for my life, and at last, in order to pacify their too
just resentment, Edward Hyde had to bring them to the door, and pay them in a cheque
drawn in the name of Henry Jekyll.
But this danger was easily eliminated from the future by opening an account at another
name of Edward Hyde himself, and when, by sloping my hand backward, I had supplied my
double with a signature, I thought I sat beyond the reach of fate.
Some two months before the murder of Sir Danvers, I had been out for one of my adventures, had
returned at a late hour, and woke the next day in bed with somewhat odd sensations.
It was in vain I looked about me, in vain I saw the decent furniture and tall proportions
of my room in the square, in vain that I recognized a pattern of the bed-curtains, and the design
of the mahogany frame, something still kept insisting that I was not where I was, that
I had not wakened where I seemed to be, but in the little room in Soho, where I was accustomed
to sleep in the body of Edward Hyde.
I smiled to myself, and in my psychological way began lazily to inquire into the elements
of this illusion, occasionally, even as I did so, dropping back into a comfortable morning
doze.
I was still so engaged when, in one of my more wakeful moments, my eyes fell upon my
hand.
Now, the hand of Henry Jekyll, as you have often remarked, was professional in shape
and size, it was large, firm, white, and comely.
But the hand which I now saw, clearly enough in the yellow light of a mid-London morning,
lying half shut on the bed-clothes, was lean, cordy, knuckly, of a dusky pallor, and thickly
shaded with a swart growth of hair.
It was the hand of Edward Hyde.
I must have stared upon it for near half a minute, sunk as I was in the mere stupidity
of wonder, before terror woke up in my breast as sudden and startling as the crash of cymbals,
and bounding from my bed I rushed to the mirror.
At the sight that met my eyes, my blood was changed into something exquisitely thin and
icy.
Yes, I had gone to bed Henry Jekyll.
I had awakened Edward Hyde.
How was this to be explained?
I asked myself.
And then, with another bound of terror, how was it to be remedied?
It was well on in the morning, the servants were up, all my drugs were in the cabinet,
a long journey down two pairs of stairs, through the back passage, across the open courts,
and through the anatomical theatre, from where I was then standing horror-struck.
It might indeed be possible to cover my face, but of what use was that, when I was unable
to conceal the alteration in my stature?
And then, with an overpowering sweetness of relief, it came back upon my mind that the
servants were already used to the coming and going of my second self.
I had soon dressed, as well as I was able, in clothes of my own size, had soon passed
through the house, where Bradshaw stared and drew back at seeing Mr. Hyde at such an hour,
and in such a strange array, and ten minutes later Dr. Jekyll had returned to his own
shape and was sitting down, with a darkened brow, to make a faint of breakfasting.
Small indeed was my appetite.
This inexplicable incident, this reversal of my previous experience, seemed like the
judgment, and I began to reflect more seriously than ever before on the issues and possibilities
of my double existence.
That part of me which I had the power of projecting, had lately been much exercised and nourished.
It had seemed to me of late, as though the body of Edward Hyde had grown in stature,
as though, before I wore that form, I were conscious of a more generous tide of blood,
and I began to spy a danger, that if this were much prolonged, the balance of my nature
might be permanently overthrown, the power of voluntary change be forfeited, and the
character of Edward Hyde become irrevocably mine.
The power of the drug had not been always equally displayed.
Once, very early in my career, it had totally failed me.
Since then I had been obliged, on more than one occasion, to double, and once with infinite
risk of death, to treble the amount.
And these rare uncertainties had cast hitherto the sole shadow on my contentment.
Now, however, and in the light of that morning's accident, I was led to remark that, whereas
in the beginning the difficulty had been to throw off the body of Jekyll, it had of late
gradually but decidedly transferred itself to the other side.
All things therefore seemed to point to this, that I was slowly losing hold of my original
and better self, and becoming slowly incorporated with my second and worse.
Between these two I now felt I had to choose.
My two natures had memory in common, but all other faculties were most unequally shared
between them.
Jekyll, who was composite, now with the most sensitive apprehensions, now with a greedy
gusto projected and shared in the pleasures and adventures of Hyde.
But Hyde was indifferent to Jekyll, or but remembered him as the mountain bandit remembers
the cavern in which he conceals himself from pursuit.
Jekyll had more than a father's interest, Hyde had more than a son's indifference.
To cast him my lot with Jekyll was to die to those appetites which I had long secretly
indulged and had of late begun to pamper.
To cast it in with Hyde was to die to a thousand interests and aspirations, and to become at
the blow and for ever despised and friendless.
The bargain might appear unequal, but there was still another consideration in the scales,
for while Jekyll would suffer smartingly in the fires of abstinence, Hyde would not even
be conscious of all that he had lost.
Strange as my circumstances were, the terms of this debate are as old and commonplace
as man.
Much the same inducements and alarms cast the die for any tempted and trembling sinner,
and it fell out with me as it falls with so vast a majority of my fellows, that I chose
the better part, and was found wanting in the strength to keep to it.
Yes I preferred the elderly and discontented doctor, surrounded by friends and cherishing
honest hopes, and bade a resolute farewell to the liberty, the comparative youth, the
light step, leaping impulses, and secret pleasures that I had enjoyed in the disguise of Hyde.
I made this choice perhaps with some unconscious reservation, for I never gave up the house
in Zoho, nor destroyed the clothes of Edward Hyde, which still lay ready in my cabinet.
For two months, however, I was true to my determination.
For two months I led a life of such severity as I had never before attained to, and enjoyed
the compensations of an approving conscience.
But time began at last to obliterate the freshness of my alarm.
The praises of conscience began to grow into a thing of course.
I began to be tortured with throws and longings, as of Hyde struggling after freedom, and at
last, in an hour of moral weakness, I once again compounded and swallowed the transforming
draught.
I do not suppose that, when a drunkard reasons with himself upon his vice, he is once out
times affected by the dangers that he runs through his brutish physical insensibility.
Neither had I, long as I had considered my position, made enough allowance for the complete
moral insensibility and insensate readiness to evil, which were the leading carriages
of Edward Hyde.
Yet it was by these that I was punished.
My devil had long been caged.
He came out roaring.
I was conscious, even when I took the draught, of a more unbridled, more furious propensity
to ill.
It must have been this, I suppose, that stirred in my soul that tempest of impatience with
which I listened to the civilities of my unhappy victim.
I declare, at least, before God, no man morally sane could have been guilty of that crime
upon so pitiful a provocation, and that I struck in no more reasonable spirit than that
in which a sick child may break a plaything.
But I had voluntarily stripped myself of all those balancing instincts by which even the
of us continues to walk with some degree of steadiness among temptations, and in my case
to be tempted, however slightly, was to fall.
Instantly the spirit of hell awoke in me enraged.
With a transport of glee I mauled the unresisting body, tasting delight from every blow, and
it was not till weariness had begun to succeed that I was suddenly, in the top fit of my
delirium, struck through the heart by a cold thrill of terror.
A mist dispersed.
I saw my life to be forfeit, and fled from the scene of these excesses, at once glorying
and trembling, my lust of evil gratified and stimulated, my love of life screwed to the
utmost peg.
I ran to the house in Soho, and, to make assurance doubly sure, destroyed my papers.
Hence I set out through the lamplit streets, in the same divided ecstasy of mind, gloating
on my crime, light-headedly devising others in the future, and yet still hastening and
still harkening in my wake for the steps of the Avenger.
Hyde had a song upon his lips as he compounded the draught, and as he drank it pledged the
dead man.
The pangs of transformation had not done tearing him, before Henry Jekyll, with streaming tears
of gratitude and remorse, had fallen upon his knees and lifted his clasped hands to
God.
The veil of self-indulgence was rent from head to foot.
I saw my life as a whole.
I followed it up from the days of my childhood, when I had walked with my father's hand, and
through the self-denying toils of my professional life, to arrive again and again with the same
sense of unreality at the damned horrors of the evening.
I could have screamed aloud.
I sought with tears and prayers to smother down the crowd of hideous images and sounds,
with which my memory swarmed against me, and still, between the petitions, the ugly face
of my iniquity stared into my soul.
As the acuteness of this remorse began to die away, it was succeeded by a sense of joy.
The problem of my conduct was solved.
Hide was thenceforth impossible.
Whether I would or not, I was now confined to the better part of my existence.
And, oh, how I rejoiced to think of it!
With what willing humility I embraced and knew the restrictions of natural life!
With what sincere renunciation I locked the door by which I had so often gone and come,
and ground the key under my heel!
The next day came the news that the murder had not been overlooked, that the guilt of
hide was patent to the world, and that the victim was a man high in public estimation.
It was not only a crime, it had been a tragic folly.
I think I was glad to know it.
I think I was glad to have my better impulses thus buttressed and guarded by the terrors
of the scaffold.
Jekyll was now my city of refuge.
Let but hide peep out an instant, and the hands of all men would be raised to take and
slay him.
I resolved in my future conduct to redeem the past.
And I can say with honesty that my resolve was fruitful of some good.
You know yourself how earnestly, in the last days of the last year, I laboured to relieve
suffering.
You know that much was done for others, and that the days passed quietly, almost happily
for myself.
Nor can I truly say that I wearied of this beneficent and innocent life.
I think instead that I daily enjoyed it more completely.
But I was still cursed with my duality of purpose, and as the first edge of my penitence
wore off, the lower side of me, so long indulged, so recently chained down, began to growl for
license.
Not that I dreamed of resuscitating hide.
The bare idea of that would startle me to frenzy.
No, it was in my own person that I was once more tempted to trifle with my conscience,
and it was as an ordinary secret sinner that I at last fell before the assaults of temptation.
There comes an end to all things.
The most capacious measure is filled at last, and this brief condescension to my evil finally
destroyed the balance of my soul.
And yet I was not alarmed.
The fall seemed natural, like a return to the old days before I had made my discovery.
It was a fine, clear January day, wet underfoot, where the frost had melted, but cloudless
overhead.
And the Regent's Park was full of winter churrupings, and sweet with spring odours.
I sat in the sun on a bench, the animal within me licking the chops of memory, the spiritual
side a little drowsed, promising subsequent penitence, but not yet moved to begin.
After all, I reflected, I was like my neighbours, and then I smiled, comparing myself with other
men, comparing my active goodwill with the lazy cruelty of their neglect, and at the
very moment of that vain glorious thought a qualm came over me, a horrid nausea, and
the most deadly shuddering.
These passed away and left me faint, and then as in its turn faintness subsided.
I began to be aware of a change in the temper of my thoughts, a greater boldness, a contempt
of danger, a solution of the bonds of obligation.
I looked down.
My clothes hung formlessly on my shrunken limbs, the hand that lay on my knee was corded
and hairy.
I was once more Edward Hyde.
A moment before I had been safe of all men's respect, wealthy, beloved, the cloth laying
from me in the dining-room at home, and now I was the common quarry of mankind, hunted,
homeless, a known murderer, thrall to the gallows.
My reason wavered, but it did not fail me utterly.
I have more than once observed that in my second character my faculties seemed sharpened
to a point, and my spirits more tensely elastic.
Thus it came about that, where Jekyll perhaps might have succumbed, Hyde rose to the importance
of the moment.
My drugs were in one of the presses of my cabinet.
How was I to reach them?
That was the problem that, crushing my temples in my hands, I set myself to solve.
The laboratory door I had closed.
If I sought to enter by the house, my own servants would consign me to the gallows.
I saw I must employ another hand, and thought of Lanyon.
How was he to be reached?
How persuaded?
Supposing that I escaped capture in the streets, how was I to make my way into his presence?
How should I, an unknown and displeasing visitor, prevail on the famous physician to rifle the
study of his colleague Dr. Jekyll?
Then I remembered that of my original character one part remained to me.
I could write my own hand, and once I had conceived that kindling spark, the way that
I must follow became lighted up from end to end.
Thereupon I arranged my clothes as best I could, and summoning a passing handsome, drove
to an hotel in Portland Street, the name of which I chanced to remember.
At my appearance, which was indeed comical enough, however tragic a fate these garments
covered, the driver could not conceal his mirth.
I gnashed my teeth upon him with a gust of devilish fury, and the smile withered from
his face.
Happily for him, yet more happily for myself, for in another instant I had certainly dragged
him from his perch.
At the inn, as I entered, I looked about me with so black a countenance as made the attendants
tremble.
Not a look did they exchange in my presence, but obsequiously took my orders, led me to
a private room, and brought me wherewithal to write.
Hyde, in danger of his life, was a creature new to me, shaken with inordinate anger, strung
to the pitch of murder, lusting to inflict pain.
Yet the creature was astute, mastered his fury with a great effort of the will, composed
his two important letters, one to Lanyon and one to Poole, and that he might receive actual
evidence of their being posted, sent them out with directions that they should be registered.
Thenceforward he sat all day over the fire in the private room, gnawing his nails.
There he dined, sitting alone with his fears, the waiter visibly quailing before his eye,
and thence, when the night was fully come, he set forth in the corner of a closed cab,
and was driven to and fro about the streets of the city.
He—I say I cannot say I—that child of hell had nothing human, nothing lived in him
but fear and hatred, and when at last, thinking the driver had begun to grow suspicious, he
discharged the cab and ventured on foot, attired in his misfitting clothes, an object marked
for observation, into the midst of the nocturnal passengers, these two base passions raged
within him like a tempest.
He walked fast, hunted by his fears, chattering to himself, skulking through the less frequented
thoroughfares, counting the minutes that still divided him from midnight.
Once a woman spoke to him, offering, I think, a box of lights.
He smote her in the face, and she fled.
When I came to myself at Lanyon's, the horror of my old friend perhaps affected me somewhat.
I do not know.
It was at least but a drop in the sea to the abhorrence with which I looked back upon these
hours.
A change had come over me.
It was no longer the fear of the gallows.
It was the horror of being hide that wracked me.
I received Lanyon's condemnation partly in a dream.
It was partly in a dream that I came home to my own house and got into bed.
I slept after the prostration of the day with a stringent and profound slumber, which not
even the nightmares that wrung me could avail to break.
I woke in the morning shaken, weakened, but refreshed.
I still hated and feared the thought of the brute that slept within me.
And I had not, of course, forgotten the apolic dangers of the day before, but I was once
more at home, in my own house, and close to my drugs, and gratitude for my escape, shone
so strong in my soul that it almost rivaled the brightness of hope.
I was stepping leisurely across the court after breakfast, drinking the chill of the
air with pleasure, when I was seized again with those indescribable sensations that heralded
the change.
And I had but the time to gain the shelter of my cabinet before I was once again raging
and freezing with the passions of hide.
It took on this occasion a double dose to recall me to myself, and, alas, six hours
after, as I sat looking sadly in the fire, the pangs returned, and the drug had to be
re-administered.
In short, from that day forth it seemed only by great effort as of gymnastics, and only
under the immediate stimulation of the drug, that I was able to wear the countenance of
juggle.
At all hours of the day and night I would be taken with a premonitory shudder.
Above all, if I slept, or even dozed for a moment in my chair, it was always as hide
that I awakened.
Under the strain of this continually impending doom, and by the sleeplessness to which I
now condemned myself, ay, even beyond what I had thought possible to man, I became in
my own person a creature eaten up and emptied by fever, languidly weak both in body and
mind, and solely occupied by one thought of my other self.
But when I slept, or when the virtue of the medicine wore off, I would leap almost without
transition, for the pangs of transformation grew daily less marked, into the possession
of a fancy brimming with images of terror, a soul boiling with causeless hatreds, and
a body that seemed not strong enough to contain the raging energies of life.
The powers of hide seemed to have grown with the sickliness of juggle, and certainly the
hate that now divided them was equal on each side.
With juggle it was a thing of vital instinct.
He now had seen the full deformity of that creature that shared with him some of the
phenomena of consciousness, and was co-heir with him to death, and beyond these links
of community, which in themselves made the most poignant part of his distress, he thought
of hide, for all his energy of life, as of something not only hellish, but inorganic.
This was the shocking thing, that the slime of the pit seemed to utter cries and voices,
that the amorphous dust gesticulated and sinned, that what was dead and had no shape should
usurp the offices of life.
And this again, that that insurgent horror was knit to him closer than a wife, closer
than an eye, lay caged in his flesh, where he heard it mutter and felt it struggle to
be born, and at every hour of weakness, and in the confidence of slumber, prevailed against
and deposed him out of life.
The hatred of hide for juggle was of a different colour.
His terror of the gallows drove him continually to commit temporary suicide, and return to
his subordinate station of a part instead of a person.
But he loathed the necessity, he loathed the despondency into which juggle was now fallen,
and he resented the dislike with which he was himself regarded.
Hence the ape-like tricks that he would play me, scrawling in my own hand blasphemies on
the pages of my books, burning the letters and destroying the portraits of my father,
and indeed, had it not been for his fear of death, he would long ago have ruined himself
in order to involve me in the ruin.
But his love of me is wonderful.
I go further.
I, who sicken and freeze at the mere thought of him, when I recall the abjection and passion
of this attachment, and when I know how he fears my power to cut him off by suicide,
I find it in my heart to pity him.
It is useless, and the time awfully fails me, to prolong this description.
No one has ever suffered such torments.
Let that suffice, and yet even to these habit brought no, not alleviation, but a certain
callousness of soul, a certain acquiescence of despair, and my punishment might have gone
for years, but for the last calamity which has now fallen, and which has finally severed
me from my own face and nature.
My provision of the salts, which had never been renewed since the date of the first experiment,
began to run low.
I sent out for a fresh supply, and mixed the draft.
The ebullition followed, and the first change of colour.
Not the second.
I drank it, and it was without efficiency.
You will learn from Poole how I have had London ransacked.
It was in vain, and I am now persuaded that my first supply was impure, and that it was
that unknown impurity which lent efficacy to the draft.
About a week has passed, and I am now finishing this statement under the influence of the
last of the old powders.
This then is the last time, short of a miracle, that Henry Jekyll can think his own thoughts,
or see his own face.
Now how sadly altered! in the glass!
Nor must I delay too long to bring my writing to an end, for if my narrative has hitherto
escape destruction, it has been by a combination of great prudence and great good luck.
Should the throes of change take me in the act of writing it, I will tear it in pieces.
But if some time shall have elapsed after I have laid it by, his wonderful selfishness
and circumscription to the moment will probably save it once again from the action of his
ape-like spite.
And indeed the doom that is closing on us both has already changed and crushed him.
Half an hour from now, when I shall again and for ever re-endue that hated personality,
I know how I shall sit shuddering and weeping in my chair, or continue, with the most strained
and fear-struck ecstasy of listening, to pace up and down this room, my last earthly
refuge, and give ear to every sound of menace.
Will Hyde die upon the scaffold, or will he find courage to release himself at the last
moment?
God knows!
I am careless.
This is my true hour of death, concerns another than myself.
Here then, as I lay down the pen and proceed to seal up my confession, I bring the life
of that unhappy Henry Jekyll to an end.
End of the strange case of Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde.